# MUSIC 140 - LEC 006
## Civil Rights Movement
**Story of Rosa Parks**
- Lived in Montgomery, Alabama
- Story
  -  Myth says she was on her way home and she was tired so she sat on the front of the bus (She says that she was not tired and she sat on the back, behind the sign).
  - A white person comes on the bus and asks her to move back even though she was sitting at the back of the bus. She refuses to budge. Later, the bus driver changes the position of the sign and tells Rosa that she is breaking the rule. 
  - Rosa was arrested and finger-printed by the police.
  - In December 1955, the African-American community of Montgomery decided not to take the bus.
  - This attracted international attention and finally the buses were integrated.

**More about the movement**
- Freedom Riders / Lunch Counter Sit-ins
- Martin Luther King Jr. : Non-violent protest

### Golden Age of Rock 'n' Roll and Civil Rights Movement
- Dislike of rock 'n' roll is linked to middle-class white fears regarding the growing strength of the Civil Rights' movement.

### The Great Extinction:
  - Elvis - March '58 - Army
  - Chuck Berry - December '59 - Arrested under the "Mann Act" (Served over 2 years in jail)
  - Jerry Lee Lewis - May '58 - Marriage to 13-year-old cousin becomes public. Was also not divorced from his previous wife so is also a polygamist. This didn't go well with the public and concert tours, recordings got cancelled.
  - Little Richard (Tutti Frutti's artist) - October '57
  - Buddy Holly was on a tour and wasn't feeling well so he decided to take a small plane instead of the bus so that he could get some rest and not have to spend lot of time on the bus. There were two more artists with him on the plane
    - The plane crashed (February '59) and Buddy Holly along with Ritchie Valens and "The Big Bopper" (JP Richardson)


So many major stars are out of the industry for some reason or the other and this creates space. Major labels sense an opportunity and **"The Empire strikes back"**.

### The "In-between" Years (1939-1963)
The end of the "Golden Age" of Rock and Roll, to the arrival of The Beatles (February, 1964)
- Major Labels recognize the Rock and Roll is not a fad.
- They begin to produce popular music similar to Rock and Roll.
- **The Dance Craze:** Started by Chubby Checker. Songs where the lyrics describe the dance you would do with the song.
  - Example: **"The Locomotion"** Little Eva (Goffin, King) 1962
- **Teen idols:** Clean-cut, idealized boyfriend - no "bad boy" image from the Golden Age. Their looks were so important that singing was secondary.
  - Bobby Vinton: **"Blue Velvet"** (1963)
    - Composed in 1950
    - Hit for Tony Bennet in 1951
  - Older TPA songs could be reworked in the new style.
  - Newer songs are written specifically for the new teen demographic. Romantic (non-sexualized) love,  and dancing.
  - Most of the newer singers did not write songs - where were the new songs coming from?
  - Many came from the Brill Building.
    - Don Kirshaner / Al Nevins Aldon Music
    - Pop music - Tin Pan Alley approach
    - A song could go from being composed to recorded and then becoming a hit in less than 3 weeks.

### The Rise of the Producer:
**The Magnetophon:**
- A reel-to-reel tape player
- Sgt. Jack Mullin found it in Germany and shipped it to the US. He realized that this device will have the best application in the entertainment industry.
- Bing Crosby was the first major celebrity to record a radio show which was to be played live on radio.
-  Bing was a tech enthusiast and he invested in a company called Ampex which produces Magnetophons.
- In 1948, Bing gave the first commercially produced reel-to-reel tape recorder to Les Paul

#### Les Paul (1915-2009)
- Popularizes the solid-body electric guitar
- Wishes to create recordings by layering performances.
- Assists in the development of the "multitrack" tape recorder.
- Example: **"Sitting On Top Of The World"** Les Paul with Mary Ford, 1953.
	- Only 2 people are responsible for this entire song.
	- Les is creating things which are technically impossible to do in the real world.
	- He played with the speed of the tapes to make Mary sound like a male voice and playing guitar in impossible ways
-  **Multitrack recording redefines the process of recording.**
**Reproduction to Production**
   - Now, recording is not the final stage of production, rather it just one stage.
   - Recordings can be edited and modified after recordings were done.
   - This gives the producer more power in the process of producing music
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTgxOTE2MDU4NiwtODMxMjI1MTU1LC02Mj
Y2NTM0ODksLTE3MDU2NDc5NzksMTI2ODQwNTU5MywtOTI2ODYy
NjAwLDE3NzAwNTM2NjAsLTE4MjA2MDIyODksMTc1NTk0ODE4NC
wtMTc2NjMyOTQ5Miw2MDAwMTQ4NjYsLTE2NjMxNjQ2MzVdfQ==

-->