# MUSIC 140 - LEC 003
## Changes in Technology:
### "Mechanical Reproduction"
1877 - Edison invents the phonograph (gramophone)

1895-1912 - transition from cylinder to disks

1925 - industry standard speed set to 78 r.p.m.
- Why 1925? Record industry beginning rise to prominence during the 1920s
- Why 78 r.p.m.? A number picked as a balance between quality and how long a record would be. For standardization purposes

#### What was recorded?
- sheet music / TPA. Early record industry controlled by the same people who controlled TPA.
- black music / rural southern white music not recorded because:
  - generally not part of the TPA / sheet music industry
  - cultural chauvinism
  - rural areas - sales?

#### Commercial Radio: 1920
- Jan. 1922 - 28 stations / December 1922 - 570 Stations
- Controlled by only a few "Networks" (CBS, NBC, Mutual)
- First radio network; NBC in 1928
- Very few independent radio stations exist
- Network radio begins to changes patterns of consumption from regional to national

Success of Radio:
- expensive one-time purchase, unlimited content
- why buy records?

#### The Rise of the Record Industry:
Record industry concerned - needs to find new markets
- Ralph Peer - Okeh Records

- Mamie Smith: "Crazy Blues" (1920)
  - Ralph Peer's singer backed out at last moment but since he had to pay for stuff, Mamie Smith, an african-american (which was unusual for people recording records) was brought in.
  - This record sold well in middle-class white audience. Was the first popular recording by african-american artist.

- Introduction of "Hillbilly" **"Carve that Possum"**: 1927
  - Uncle Dave Macon and the Fruit Jar Drinkers

- Introduction of "Race" **"How Long Blues"**: 1928
  - Carr and Blackwell
  - Next step in development of blues .
  - Increased complexity due to multiple musicians.
  - We hear pianos which is a sign of urban music

### Television:
- First demonstration in 1927
- Experimental and low-resolution broadcasts through the 1930s
- Network broadcasts begin in 1939
- By 1945 - 6 Stations
- By 1955 - 411 Stations
- Major Networks move to Television

First "Black Appeal" radio station - WDIA Memphis, 1948
By 1954 - 200 Black Appeal radio stations are on the air

#### Who is listening?
- Popular music (TPA) of the late 1940s and early 1950s is "safe".
- Most popular song of 1951 - Nat King Cole: **"Too Young"** (1951, Lippman, Dee)
- Most popular song of 1953 - Patti Page: **"(How Much Is) That Doggie in the Window"** (1952, Merril)

## Baby Boomers
### Extended Adolescence
- Teenagers were a leisure class because of industrial development in USA during / after WW2. One person's income could support the family so teenagers didn't have to leave school etc.
- They also had part-time jobs' income which they could spend on their luxuries
- First time a generation gap has appeared between the parents and children
- A music industry aimed at teenagers appears
- Teenagers purchased transistor radios

### Jump Blues:
- Develops from a fusion of Big Band music (TPA / Jazz) with more prominent blues / race music influence.
- more focus on vocal performer.
- Smaller group (cheaper) with focus on saxophone, trumpet, and rhythm section (bass, drums, piano).
- **Good Rockin' Tonight** (1948, Wynonie Harris)

### Gospel:
Ray Charles (Robinson) 1930-2004
- born, Albany Georgia
- blind at age 7
- learns music in a school for the blind
- 1952 Atlantic Records
- Fusion of the energy of African American spiritual practice with secular lyrics.
- Success with white audiences - heightened level of intensity
- Nickname among fellow musicians - The Genius
- He takes the music of the church - keeping everything same, changed the lyrics

**"I've Got a Woman"** (1954)
- Based on a church song entitled "It Must Be Jesus."

### Chicago Electric Blues:
Muddy Waters 1913-1983
- born in Mississippi
- played guitar and harmonica
- emulated Robert Johnson
- moves to Chicago, early 1940s
- switches to electric guitar, 1945
- 1946, records for Aristocrat Records ( would later become Chess Records)

**"Hoochie Coochie Man"** (1954, Willie Dixon)
- Verse chorus (modified 12-bar blues)
- Stop Time
- Prominence of the electric guitar and harmonica
- Use of amplifier to distort the sound of the guitar, this distortion was valuable for them.

**Verse**: Same music, different words 
**Chorus**: Same music, same words, may include the title of the song, may feature a higer level of intensity

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzMDE2NDk5NTksMTM5NTQxMDUzOSw1NT
YxMDM5MDksLTIwOTA1NDA3NDQsLTI4MDc0OTMzMywtNzkxNDg4
ODAzLDQ5OTEyNTI0Miw1NzY2NDEwMzEsMjAxNzYzMTA5NywtMz
Y1OTI4NzE5LDg3NzA2NzM1OCwtMTc2MDI3ODkzLDEyNzc1MzM0
OTQsNzQ1NzkyNTQsLTEyNzE4NjYyNDUsMzc0NTAzNDY3LDE3MT
QxODM1OTksLTIxMDM5NTI4MjBdfQ==
-->