# MUSIC 140 - LEC 010
### James Brown:
Soul Brother #1
Godfather of Soul

First hit - 1956, **"Please, Please, Please"**.
- Is considered R&B
- Music historians say that it is something around this song when Soul started breaking away from R&B.

1963 - "Live at the Apollo"
- Apollo is in NYC
- One of the first albums by an African-American artist to sell over 1 million copies

1965 - "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag" Crossover hit

**"I Feel Good"** (Recorded in 1964) Becomes Brown's biggest Pop hit (#3) after "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag."
- Apart from being a hit among his African-American audience, this song was also very popular among white audience.
- Has an AABA structure and also 12 bar blues

### '65 - '67: Inner city riots
- '67 was called the long hot summer
- In Detroit
- Martin Luther King Jr. , assassinated April 4th, 1968  on a hotel balcony in Memphis, Tennessee
- The Black Panthers
- The Re-Africanization of culture
  - Black people started making cultural changes to separate themselves from white culture.
  - Changes in diet, clothing, hairstyle etc. to become closer to West African culture.
  - James Brown applied the same idea to music.

_Cold Sweat_ (1967)
Introduces a new style

**"Get Up (I feel like being a) Sex Machine"** (1970)
- Deprivileged of melody and harmony
- Privilege of Rhythm. Not just rhythm but also articulation
- Interlock groove - based on African Drum Groups Community
  - Combining a bunch of simple instruments being played which combine to make something much more complicated
- Involvement of community is an important part of the song where we can hear the band talking back to James during the beginning of the song.
- Riff based composition. This is where simple riff structure came back and it always stays to date.
- Tremendously successful with African-Americans but virtually no success with white audience.
- Cyclical - pleasure in repitition
- Open-ended forms - cyclical vs. linear
- This is the kind of style which formed the genre known as Punk

## Bob Dylan
1961-1965 Traditional folk singer/songwriter

**"A Hard Rain's a Gonna Fall"** (1963)
- Nuclear missiles / black rain
- Cuban Missile Crisis - October 1962
- Lyric Style

### Influence of The Beatles
Newport Folk Festival (1965)
"Dylan Goes Electric"
Creation of "Folk Rock"

**The Counter Culture**
Influence of The Beats (Jack Kerouac, Allan Ginsberg)
Jazz Beat / Beaten down / Beatitude

Revived in the early 1960s

Move away from ideology of parents

Hippies
Two main "centers": Greenwich Village (New York) and Haight-Ashbury (San Francisco)

Homology of Sensory Stimulation (Psychedelic)
- Poster Art
- Clothing
- Drugs
- **Music:**
  - Loud
  - Lightning Shows
  - Longer or unusual song forms
  - Jamming (collective improvisation)


**"Truckin'"** by The Grateful Dead (1970)
- influenced by Folk Rock 
- Collective improvisation (Jamming)

More aggressive sound develops
Less obvious folk image
Acid Rock

**"White Rabbit"** by Jefferson Airplane (1967)
- Good example of Acid Rock
- Was just under 3 minutes long which was not usually the norm with long counter culture songs.
- Was also a Pop hit
- Drug references
- Reference to parent distrust
- Reference to Alice in Wonderland (White Rabbit). Being a children's story, this story has a lot of drug mentions.
- Idea behind the psychedelic is that the world we see is not everything and there is another world behind the scenes.


### After 1967:
- Youth Culture becomes more politically active.
- Focus on Civil Rights and the Draft / Vietnam
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTQxMjY2ODQwOCwxMTM0OTg4NDcxLDE0NT
g4NDc2MDcsLTYzMjk3MzQzMywyMDI4Mzc5NTcxLC0xNzU1NDg4
MzY1LDQzMjMwMzQzNCwxNTc3MzI5Nzc4LDk0ODUxNjg2NSwtMj
AxNjA1MDI1LC0xMzA0ODgwMjg1LC0yMDg5ODI3MDIwLC00MTc5
Nzk4ODgsLTc4ODMyNTM5NywxNzEyODc5NjM4LDkwODgyMzE3Ny
wxNTkxOTMxNTY3LDE3MjA4NTE2MjYsLTE0MzAxNTA3NjNdfQ==

-->