# MUSIC 140 - LEC 008
### Test next week
Everything after cover versions and up to until the beginning of British Invasion
Same format as last test.
Songs can be played from anywhere (not necessarily from beginning)

### The Beatles (continued)
End of 4th U.S. Tour in '65 - $65 million dollars

Importance - Template for what is to follow.
Mersey Beat: Gerry and the Pacemakers, The Searchers, The Swinging Blue Jeans

July, 1965 - Their second film: _Help_

**"Yesterday"** (from the album, "Help")
- AABA form
- More complex harmonic and lyric structures
- String Quartet (considered serious)

Beatles are evolving - moving away from pop song writing.

August '65 - "Help"
Dec '65 - "Rubber Soul"
August '66 - "Revolver"

**"Tomorrow Never Knows"** (from _Revolver_) (composed by John Lennon)
- Song is based on a drone (influence of non-western culture)
- The Beatles are developing interest in classical music of India, they are travelling overseas
- Drones are an important part of Indian classical music
- An instrument called _Tanpura_
- Lyrics are based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead
- Vocal is "double-tracked" and is run through a "Leslie" speaker cabinet
- Makes use of tape "loops" (avant-garde) and backwards recording
- Two different solos played by George Harrison - one Guitar solo and one Sitar solo
- Demonstrates the growing influence of non-western culture, and the technology of the recording studio on the work of the Beatles
This song would have been completely unplayable in concert in the 1960s...

The band was losing interest in public performance. (1966)

An English newspaper ran a series of interviews with The Beatles. John was becoming as the intellectual of the group. John was asked "What he thought was the role of religion in today's music?". John said, "Jesus was alright and has some good ideas. But now they have become like big businesses. Beatles are bigger than Jesus".

Quoted as John Lennon says "Bigger than Jesus". Lots of protests etc.

Last tour ended o August 29th - Candlestick park in San Francisco

Beatles announces that they were retiring from public performances and would become a recording-only band.

June 1967 - **"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band"** 
- Album cover included all of the lyrics to all of the songs (something unusual)
- Extraordinarily looking Album Cover

Example: **"A Day In The Life"**
- Actually assembled out of sections separately composed
- "post modern" approach to creating forms
  - post-modernism means you get to make your own rules.
  - You can come up with a new idea or borrow an old idea.
  - Don't have to follow any conventions
- avant garde techniques with orchestra and piano

The first "concept album" (?)

Shift to the "Hippie Aesthetic"
- Marks the shift from "Rock 'n' Roll" to "Rock"
- Moving from:
  - singles to albums
  - dancing to listening
  - entertainment to "serious" musicians
  - FM radio - AOR (Album Oriented Rock)

1967 - Just before Sgt. Peppers came out, Brian Epstein died of drug overdose. After this, they started disintegrating.

Spring 1970 - Beatles break up after Paul McCarthy announced he is leaving the band.

In a period of 6 years and 2 months, Beatles changed he entire music industry.

## The British Blues Revival:
London - interest in blues
Chess Tour

Fleetwood Mac, Cream, Eric Clapton, Led Zepplin, The Rolling Stones

### The Rolling Stones
Leader is Brian Jones
Debut at the Marquee Club: July, 1962
Andrew Loog Oldham became their manager in April, 1963
1963 - Change of Image
1963-1964: All singles are covers (Chuck Berry, Buddy Holly, Willie Dixon)
**"I Wanna' Be Your Man"** November, 1963 (Lennon / McCartney)

"England's Newest Hitmakers"
- Mostly blues covers

**"King Bee"** - April 1964
- Blues form
- Cover of song by Slim Harpo (1957)

February, 1965 **"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction"** (Jagger / Richards)
- First US number one pop.

The Beatles / The Rolling Stones
- Image
  - Rolling Stones were the dangerous group and appealed to the working class.
  - The Beatles appealed to the middle-class
- "process" versus "product"
  - Rolling Stones are about the process and are aimed to make sense in the moment while Beatles had a clear goal in mind.
  - African-American music is process oriented while Tin Pan Alley is product oriented

As the band became more successful and more "original", Brian Jones becomes more un-interested. In Spring 19XX Rolling Stones were preparing for a U.S. Tour. Brian Jones' work visa was rejected due to un-settled drug charges. 

Brian Jones stepped down and later he was found dead in his swimming pool due to "death by mis-adventure" 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTMwODk2NDk1XX0=
-->