# MUSIC 140 - LEC 004
### Quiz Next Week - 5/31/2018
- Covers everything until lecture 3
- Anything that happened in class could be part of a test question
- Names, Dates, Songs, Historical Significance
- Test will be in STC 1012, not in lecture room (STP 105)
- Somewhere around 35-40 questions.
- Few questions from textbook readings - some important sections
- 4-5 Reading Questions
- Look for big and main ideas, not small and trivial things
- There will be a listening section at end of quiz. 2 questions about the song. Any question about song, composer, significance etc. Will hear each song twice, first 30 seconds.
- All multiple choice ques.
- Advice:
  - Test is not as hard.
  - Won't have to pick between a good and a better answer. There will be a clear right answer.

## Cover Versions: 1954-1956
- "white" versions of "black" records
- There used to be multiple versions of same song performed by different artists.
- The idea of a song belonging to an artist doesn't exist.
- Legal to do cover versions.
- 

One of the most famous of the "Cover Versions" was:

### Cover Version: "Tutti Frutti"
#### Original Song
**Little Richard (Richard Wayne Penniman)**
- Born 1932, Macon Georgia
- First big hit was **"Tutti Frutti"**
  - The song's original lyrics were modified to be less explicit so that it can be released on radio
  - Structure: 12 bar blues
  - Lots of energy, distortion, very present etc.
- Released late 1955 on Speciality Records (lyrics revised by Dorothy LaBostrie)
- "Crossover" hit #2 R&B, #17 Pop

#### Cover Version for "Tutti Frutti"
By **Pat Boone**
- Born 1934
- Was just breaking as a pop star in 1955
- Early 1956, releases a cover of **"Tutti Frutti"**

**About the Cover**
- Less distortion, more round voice
- All changes were deliberately made to make the song more appealing to white audiences
- No R&B, #10 Pop chart

### Cover Version: "Sh-Boom"
**Original:**
- Recorded originally in June 1954 by "The Chords" / Cat Records
- Became a hit on R&B's chart and then crossed over to Pop chart.

**Cover Version:**
- A couple weeks later, a cover version was released by "The Crew Cuts" in July 1954 / Mercury Records (A major label)
- "The Crew Cuts" were Canadian - from Toronto

**Comparison**
- In the cover version, voice feels more distant than original. More echo.
- We can hear the lead singer breathing in the original song.
- No distortion in cover song's voice and less proximity.
- All these changes were very deliberate to make it more appealing to white audience
- The idea of more distance comes from giving the listener more space as opposed to the original song where singers are right in the face.
- **Form**:
Original: 1x through AABA, with interludes.
Cover: 2xs through AABA - clearly stated
- **Voice**:
Original: Distorted - use of lower octave in B.
Cover: Clean, no use of lower octave.
- **Solo**:
Original: Sax - distorted timbre, sexual metaphor.
Cover: No solo - repeats of "Sh-Boom" group vocal - timpani joke.
- **The Chords**: #3 R&B / #5 Pop
**The Crew Cuts**: no R&B / #1 Pop, #1 for 9 weeks and #1 song of the year.
- Racist? Or a continuation of TPA traditions?
  - Yes, it was racist but the record companies were just trying to make money and market the song in the best way.
  - In this process they were playing to racist sentiments of the audience. They even made covers for Country songs by making them more pop-like and reducing country-elements.
  - These Race-based cover versions largely stopped by 1976

## Rock 'n' Roll
Both White and Black artists performing in this new style: A mix of pop, C&W, and R&B, targeted at teenagers - Rock 'n' Roll

This term is attributed to Allan Freed.

#### Bill Haley and the Coments
- Born in 1925 (important)
- Originally "Bill Haley and the Saddlemen"
- Western Swings
- Changes to "Bill Haley and the Comets in 1952."
- Early hits with **"Crazy Man, Crazy"** and **"Shake, Rattle and Roll"**.

**Rock Around The Clock (1954)**
- Becomes popular in 1955
- "Blackboard Jungle" - part of the moral panic which happened when middle-class white teenagers were interested in african-american music
- 12 bar blues
- Baby Boomers liked if the artist was the same age as them. Bill Haley was in late 20s when this song became a hit (he was old) while there were other singers who appealed more to teenagers

### Elvis Presley (1935-1977)
Tulepo, Mississippi
1953 - 18 yrs old

**Sam Phillips / Sun Records**
- Spring 1954 - Starts recording with Scotty Moore (Guitar) and Bill Black (Bass)
- July 1954 **"That's Alright Mamma"** / **"Blue Moon of Kentucky"**

#### "That's Alright Mamma"
- Sam Phillips recorded this song and sent it to his friend - Duy who played it on radio.
- The song became very popular on radio and listeners insisted the radio station to keep playing it.
- Later, Elvis Presley himself came into the radio station and Duy asked him which high school he went to.
  - Note: High schools were segregated so Duy wanted to know whether Elvis was Black or White
- Most people listening to the song thought that it was an african-american artist singing.
- It was released along with **"Blue Moon of Kentucky"** being on the B-side of the record.

#### More about Elvis
- 1954 - 1955: Elvis on Sun
- 12 songs - all covers
- Rockabilly - "The Hillbilly Cat."
- Regional Star, some national success on Country Charts
- Elvis didn't use to write songs, he usually recorded songs that he liked growing up
- If a writer wanted Elvis to sing their song, they had to give 50% of writing credits to Elvis. 1 writer said no to this.
- When Elvis started becoming a national star, Sam Phillips knew that he couldn't support this, being a small record company so he sold Elvis' contract to a major record company - RCA for US$ 35,000 which was the highest amount of money paid for a contract transfer at that time.
- Elvis' manager was Colonel Tom Parker in 1956. He used cutting edge technology - Tevlevision to promote Elvis.
- Elvis appeared on national television 11 times

**Songs:**
- **"Heartbreak Hotel"*** April-May '56 #1 Pop/Country/ #5 R&B
- August to December '56 - **"Hound Dog"**, **"Don't Be Cruel"**, **"Love Me Tender"**, all #1 Pop. **"Hound Dog"**, **"Don't Be Cruel"** both chart #1 on pop/country/R&B

By the end of 1956, Elvis Presley was the biggest star ever

- Tom Parker directs Elvis' career more towards Pop
  - This was done to prevent Elvis 
- Elvis not charting R&B after 1957

Elvis enters the army - March 1958 to March 1960
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0ODQyOTQzMTUsLTI2MzY1NzcxMCwxMj
Y2ODIzMzQ0LC0xMDU0NTYxNDQ4LDc2MjIyNzQ4MSwxNjA2NjM2
MTkwLC05NzU0MzMwNTMsLTI5OTcyOTA1NywtOTQ4Mjk5NTU5LC
0xNjAyOTc5NTksMTM0NjQ3ODE0NiwtMTgwMDEwNTM2OCw2Mzcy
NjAxMjAsMTc2OTA2NTAxOCwtMTU0NTQzMDQ3NSwxMTUyNDU1Nz
QzXX0=
-->