# MUSIC 140 - LEC 001
### 1945
- End of WW II (1939-1945)
- End of "Big Band" era.
- Big bands dominated music industry since mid 1930s.
- Band leaders such as Benny Goodman, Count Basie, Duke Ellington, and Tommy Dorsey were 'stars' of this period.
- During late 1940s, there would be a returning to the focus on vocalists.
- Music industry divided into 3 distinct categories:
  **1. Popular Music:** intended audience - white / middle class / urban / northern US
  **2. Race:** intended audience - black, regardless of class or location
  **3. Hillbilly:** intended audience - lower/ working class, primarily white/ southern US - origins in poor, white, rural - is now migrating to urban areas (particularly in southern US) 

### Big Band Music
- Trumbets, Trombones
- Example: "Sentimental Journey" (brown/Homer/Green, 1944). Performed by Les Brown and His Band of Renown ft. Doris Day.
  - General: Pop
  - Specific: Big Band
  - Became song of the summer
- Primarily intended to be dance music.
- Smooth, controlled sound

### Race Music
- Example: "Good Rockin' Tonight" (Roy Brown, 1947)
  - Version we are listening by Wynonie Harris (Recorded in 1948)
  - General - Race Music
  - Specific - Jump Blues
  - More rough and aggressive sound

### Hillbilly
- Example: "Blue Moon of Kentucky" (Bill Monroe, 1946 - Recording released in 1947)
  - General - Hillbilly
  - Specific - Bluegrass
- Moved away from Trumpets, Trombones. Now have guitars etc.

### Laws
- What creates the conditions for Popular Music to become a consumer product?
- copyright law - intellectual property
- 1730s to 1830s - Amendments to the copyright law to cover sheet music

### Victorian Ballad - Parlour Song
- Victorian Era
- Industrial Revolution
- Rise of Middle Class
- Luxury items - Piano - a symbol of wealth
- Daughters pursue "leisure" activities
- Parlour Songs
- Example: Believe Me, If All Those Endearing Young Charms, Thomas Moore (Early 1800s)
- Characteristics:
  - Piano Accompaniment
  - Vocal control
  - Themes: loyalty, honesty, control, restraint
  - Similar idea in Doris Day's song

### Tin Pan Alley
- Charles K Harris, "After the Ball" 1892
- Sheet music sells over 5,000,000 copies
- The first H
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwNzI4NDI3NTEsMTI2NDcxNzEyMyw0Nj
cyMTQ4NTEsMTYxMjQxNjcxOCwtMjA4NDM3Njc0NywtNzg3MDcw
NjIzLC01NTQxNDUyNjcsLTE5MDgwMTY1NTQsMzg0NDczNjk3LC
00NjIzNDcyNTMsLTg4NTAzNDUwMCwtNDg2Nzc3OTU1LDgwMzM2
NDA4NiwtMTA5MTk3MDk3NSwyNjg1MzAzOTEsLTg4MzgzMTU2OF
19
-->