# MUSIC 140 - LEC 011
## Jimi Hendrix:
- Technical virtuoso
- Control of high levels of distortion
- Worked as a guitar player for other musicians in early .60s (Played in Little Richard's band)
- Fundamentally changed the way electric guitar is played.

**"Voodoo Child (Slight Return)"** (1967)
- Blues-influence

### Woodstock: (August 1969)
- Counter-culture.
- It was held on Max's farm.
- 350,000 to 500,000 people showed up. Around 30,000 were expected to come.
- A large group of people were stuck in the middle of nowhere and they worked together to help each other out.
- Rolling Stones were invited to Woodstock but they denied.

### Altamont, California: (December, 1969)
- Rolling Stones tried to have their own version of Woodstock.
- They hired the Hells Angels motorcycle gang for security and paid them $500 with beer.
  - This was a bad decision as they beat up people, and made the event a disaster.
- Decision to have the concert in Altamont race track wasn't a good one due to the shortage of space.
- This gave the people who were against the counterculture, a chance to criticize it.

April, 1970: Paul McCartney leaves The Beatles
- The very heart of the counterculture was gone.

Kent State, Ohio: May 1970
- Protest at Kent State University.
- The national guards fired 70 rounds of rifles.
- 10 students were injured, 4 were dead.
- The Governor of Ohio: "They had it coming".

September, 1970: Jimi Hendrix dies.
October, 1970: Janice Joplin dies of a drug overdose.
July, 1971: Jim Mossison (The Doors) dies

All three of them were 27 years old.

This marked the end of counterculture, the idea of a collective.

### The 1970s:
Failer of the Counter-Culture begins a shift to a more cynical view of the world.

Reinforced by:

The Energy Crisis (1973-1974)
- Yom Kippur War (October, 1973)
- The Energy Crisis marks the beginning of the first economic recession since the end of WWII.
- USA supported Israel in the war due to which the rival nations cut down USA's oil supply and there was a literal shortage of oil all over the country.
- This is when gas tank locks were invented and people were shot over stealing gas.
- This marked the end of post-war prosperity of the United States.

Watergate:
- Facing criminal charges and impeachment, President Richard Nixon resigns (August, 1974).

Vietnam:
- The fall of Siagon (April 30, 1975).
- United States lost a war.
- All of this captured on live television.
- This shaked the United States sense of being a world power.

### Hard Rock / Heavy Metal
Shift to the "Hippie Aesthetic"
- Started by The Beatles' Sgt. Peppers
- Marks the shift from "Rock 'n' Roll" to "Rock"
- Moving from:
  - Singles to Albums
  - Dancing to Listening
  - Entertainers to "serious" musicians
  - FM radio - AOR (Album Oriented Rock)
- Sonic development from Psychedelic Blues.
- To a great extent it is a response to the failure of Counter Culture.

#### Distinctions between Hard Rock and Heavy Metal:
- **Distortion:** More confined to guitar for Hard Rock but for Heavy Metal, higher levels of distortion can be found in other instruments like Bass.
- **Tempo:** Songs tend to be mid-ranged tempos for Hard Rock end of the spectrum. For Heavy Metal music, tempos can be extreme - very fast or very slow. Heavy metal songs can have huge variations of tempo while hard rock tend to maintain the same tempo.
- **Lyrics:** Hard rock end of spectrum tend to have lyrics similar to Chuck Berry songs (Cars, women, party etc.). Hard Rock songs have lyrics about psychological loss of control, about wars, fantasy, religious imagery.
- Lot easier to hear blues influences when looking at the hard rock end of the spectrum.

#### Example: AC/DC (Hard Rock)
- Australian, formed in 1973.
- The album "Back In Black" (1980) has sold over 50 million copies, 2nd highest album sales in history.
- Strong blues influence, steady tempos, rock 'n' roll lyrics.
- This band strongly personifies the Hard Rock end with Chuck Berry style lyrics.

#### Example: Metallica (Heavy Metal)
- Los Angeles, formed in 1981.
- Musically highly technical, frequent tempo changes, instrumental sections, classical influences, virtuosic soloing, heavy distortion, lyrics that express alienation and loss of control.

Founding Bands
1. Black Sabbath
2. Deep Purple
3. Led Zeppelin

#### Black Sabbath:
- British
- "doomy music"
- Madness / futility of war

**"War Pigs"** (1970 - from the album _Paranoid_)
- Tempo changes
- Instrumental sections
- Lyrics that focus on alienation, futility
- But, lower level of distortion

Deep Purple:
- Also British
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgyNjE2NTM5Myw5MzAwOTE5NDgsLTMwNj
A1OTg3NiwtMjA0NTEyNDY2MCwtMTY5NjUxOTY1OCwtNTYyNzU1
NSwyNzUwNTk3MjgsLTk2MDMxNTcxNSwtMTI1NjAwMzExOSwxMD
Q5OTc5MDA3LC0xMzExMTY3MDE0LDEzNjMwODE1NTksNjc4Nzg2
ODY2LC0xNDgyOTAxODQsLTE2MTUzNDY1MTUsMzcxMDA3OTE1LC
0zMzA2MjY4MDUsLTIwNTc4OTIyNjBdfQ==
-->