# MUSIC 140 - LEC 007

**First 20 minutes missing**

### The Weavers: Pete Seeger
**This Land is Your Land** (Woody Guthrie, 1940)
- Instruments and vocal timbre
- Lyric content
- Successful from ___  to  ___
- Blacklisted due to suspicion of being communist in ___

HUAC (House Un-American Activities Committee) and McCarthyism (1947-1956)

Folk musicians were under radar of being Communist

Late 1950s / Early 60s - Baby Boom reaches college.
- interest in "serious" music

Music industry started to produce songs targeted at leading edge of baby boomers. 

### The Kingston Trio / Peter Paul and Mary
- Similar to earlier music but more "produced" - smoother sounding, more "arranged".

The Kingston Trio: **Tom Dooley** (1959)


### Bob Dylan:
- Earlier known as Robert Zimmerman
- 1961-1965 Traditional folk singer / songwriter

**A Hard Rain's a Gonna Fall** (1962-1963)
- Very poetic and allegoric language. Sounds like something written a long time ago.
- Reference to the Cuban Missile Crisis
  - In Fall 1962, US blockades the island of Cuba
  - We all came very close to end of the world.
  - The hard rain of Nuclear Missiles which was gonna fall.

Music industry was worth about 200 million in 1954. 600 million in 1959.
The in-between years: At end of 1963, worth 600 million. It did not grow. Just holds value.
When the Beatles arrived, it was over 1 billion.

### The British Invasion:
U.S. in early 60s
Optimism with Kennedy (Camelot) / ML King, Civil Rights.

"The New Frontier"

August 1963 - Washington: Martin Luther King Jr. - "I have a dream"

### Post War Britain
Return to DIY culture
Massive unemployment, things were very tough after the war.

- Skiffle - Groups which played popular music with acoustic instruments.

#### The Quarrymen:
- July 1957 John Lennon / Paul McCartney (Vocals and Guitar)
- Both of them used to write songs
- February 1958: George Harrison ("Lead" Guitar)
- They wrote songs everyday. At least 1 song everyday.
- August 1960 - Pete Best (Drums)

The Beatles

They used to play in :
- Hamburg, Germany
- Liverpool - The Cavern Club

Paul McCartney becomes the lead bass player

Manager - December, 1961 - Brian Epstein
- He changes the Beatles from their "Rocker Image" to a more cutting edge, cleaner image.
- Every record company in Great Britain turned down the Beatles.
- June, 1962 - Parlophone - Division of EMI
- Producer - George Martin
- New Drummer: Ringo Starr

September, 1962 **"Love Me Do"** - First song of the Beatles

January, 1963 **"Please Please Me"**
- AABA form
- Numerous rehearsed details
- Change in rhythmic density in vocal
- Highest note at the end of the B section
- TPA-style attention to arrangement

February, 1964 - "The Beatles are coming"
- Deb 9th Ed Sullivan Show - 70 Million viewers.
- They went down to Washington and played in a sports arena.
- Tour lasts for two weeks - 2 million albums, $2.5 million merchandising.
- Hysteria known as "Beatlemania"

April, 1964
- 12 songs in the Billboard top 100 pop:
- Including positions 1 to 5.

End of 4th U.S. Tour in '65 - $65 million dollars.

Beatles changed the way live performances were held. They changes the economics the industry.

Next class, we will see how they changed the music itself.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTk3NDA2OTQ3MywtMTIyMjg4ODU3NCwxMz
YzOTkxODcsMjAyMjE0ODM1NSwtNjMwMjM2Njg5LDU5MjQ2MDYy
LDE4ODg0NTY3MjksLTY1NzQ2MzcxNyw4MDc2NjI0MjIsMzYyOD
AyNTk5LDM1MzgwNDEwOCw1MzAwNzIzNzcsLTE1OTUzMDM0MzUs
LTc0NTM5NDE4MywtMTYwNTc5NjcwNCwtNzg4ODY0NDEzLC0xMz
c2NTg5MzIwLC0zOTE4MTczNzksLTQ2NjQ4NzM3NSwxNDcyNzAx
MzY1XX0=
-->