# MUSIC 140 - LEC 005
## Chuck Berry

### Background
- Chuck Berry worked out and calculated everything.
- He wanted to be rich.
- His dad was a carpenter/contractor.
- He researched about which african-american music was popular among middle-class white households.
- He found Nat King Cole was popular - had clear words and songs told stories.
- He entered music contests.
- He was very self-conscious. Changed his guitar to sound brighter and words came from nasal cavity like country and western.
- He ends up at Chess Records in Chicago in 1950s which was a small record company.
  - They couldn't record rhythm & blues due to lack of performer's interest and they took a break. During the break, he start singing a song from 1940s - Ida Red.
  - Later, he changes up the song's lyrics to form a story so that they can make more money and wouldn't have to split it with the writers
  - This song - **"Maybellene"** was released July 1955. His first major single and his entry into the world of Rock & Roll.

### Early History:
- Born in St. Louis
- Music Competitions 

### Chess Records
- **"Maybellene"** July 1955

### Themes:
- He wanted to appeal to middle class white teenagers to make more money. So, he had following themes in his songs:
  - **Cars** - Important symbol for teenagers. Represented freedom, privacy, beginning to feel like adult.
  - **Girls** - Vast majority of popular music is positioned from the point view of men and women are seen as things to pursue and show off to other men. In Chuck Berry songs, women are objects. This double-standard is still with us today.
  - **No School** - Lots of songs about waiting about school to end, summer vacations etc.
  - **Rock 'n' Roll** - Celebrating the music itself

#### Few "cover versions" of Berry's songs - why?
- Centrality of the electric guitar. If you remove the guitar from his songs, half the song was gone.
- Unlike artists such as Little Richard, Berry had little in this performance or music that was viewed as a "threat".

**"Johnny B. Goode" (1958)** #2 R&B / #8 Pop
- 12 Bar Blues with a "text heavy" narrative.

#### White elements:
- Text Heavy - narrative
- Clear enunciation
- Country guitar song

#### Black Elements:
- Blues chord structure
- Added 6th (boogie woogie)
- Call and response between voice and guitar
- Guitar solo is structures on timbre and rhythm.

#### Elvis vs. Chuck
- Elvis was way more successful by any metrics - money, fame, hits etc.
- Chuck was more influential though. 
- Bands like Rolling Stone and Beatles were more likely to model themselves after and do cover versions of Chuck Berry even though they admired Elvis.
- Chuck wrote his own songs and played the guitar on his records as opposed to Elvis.

### "The Golden Age of Rock and Roll." (1954-1959)
#### Corruption - payola:
- Majors implicitly link race with the "quality" of the music.
- Rock 'n' Roll is attacked on the grounds that it is inferior music (inferior = black influenced).
- Payola Hearings (bribery)
- Alan Freed - Man who coine
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExMTE0MjE5OTUsMTc0MDU1MzQxNiwtMT
MwODkwOTU1NCwxOTQ3Mzc1NTgzLDEwMDc1NzEzOSwxOTE2NjUx
MzUyLC0xMzA1NDM5OTY5XX0=
-->