# MUSIC 140 - LEC 012
## Final Exam on August 1
- Exam will be cumulative
- Reading and Listening sections will only consist of material after term test 2
- Cutoff for asking questions is Monday, July 30th
- Pattern will be similar to first 2 tests, there will be 4 listening questions on the instead of the usual 3

### Led Zeppelin (Continued)

**"Whole Lotta Love"** by Led Zeppelin

Center of experience is the Stadium concert. Why?
- No radio air play
- No video/music television
- Critical rejection in music press

Concert is the only place to "connect" with the band

Becomes focal point:
- Form of worship
- Rejection of the collective
- Adulation of technical mastery of an individual
- Presentation is similar to that of a corporation
- All bands have a definitive logo that is heavily projected
- Its not about the collective, it is about the individual

There are some topics left out and we would need to do reading about it. There will be definitively 1-2 questions from here on the final exam:
- Origin and development of Punk music which was rejecting the idea of stardom and greatness.

## Disco
Also a response to the above kind of music but it embraces the idea of stardom and says that everyone is a star.
- Elaborate clothing, lots of mirrors so that you could see yourself being a star.
- People involved in it were initially minorities who felt rejected by middle class white artists.
- It later transformed into Electronic Dance Music

## Hip Hop
- Folk Culture
- South Bronx, New York City - 1970s
- Rap / Break Dancing / Graffiti Art

After Bronx was abandoned by people and became sort-of like a wasteland, similar to England young people there were trying to figure out ways to express themselves but didn't have enough ways to do so. They started making graffiti art on subway trains and making music. All of this was an organic process and wasn't done in any systematised way.

Precursors:
1. Signifying / The Dozens
    - Oral word game
    - Ritualized insulting
    - African origin
2. Jamaican Toasting
    - Yard dances / Sound system men
    - SSM become 1st Jamaican recording producers
    - Producing for Yard Dances
    - Same song on both sides, one without vocals
    - SSM would vocally improvise over the "B" side.
    - Toasting

PreHistory:

1973, Kool Herc
- First guy to do Jamaican style yard dances in New York City.
- Two turntables
- Extends exciting moments of a song - "breaks"
- "cutting and mixing"
- Toasting

1976, Grand Master Flash
- Develops Kool Herc's techniques
- "quick mix"
- This the guy who figured out beat matching
- He could not do his own toasting because he had to switch between records at a high frequency.
- So, he needed a rapper. This is where the division of roles between rappers and DJs happens.

1976, Grand Master Meli Mel
- Toaster/rapper for Grand Master Flash
- Does "full length" raps
- Writes them down
- Essentially the first song writer in hip-hop

1978, Grand Wizard Theodore
- Scratching
- Redefining technology of the turntable
- A turntable is a technology of consumption. It means you buy the turntable and buy the record. It is just intended to be played as it by just putting the record on it and let it play.
- Theodore turns the turntable into a technology of production. He used the technological device as a music
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTMyMTUyNzcxMiwxMzEyNjEzODc2LC0xNj
UwNDA5MjIzLC0xOTA0NTIwNDgzLC04NTQzOTExMjIsMTM3NjU2
NjA0MiwyMTMyOTY4NTM1LC03NjcyOTc4NTksLTEzNzAzNzk4Nz
QsMzU1Njc0NTkzLDE4MjAyODM0NDIsLTIwMjM0MTEwNDQsLTE1
NzA2NjE0NTQsMTE4MzUzMDU0NywxMjUxMTc3MzcxXX0=
-->