# CS241 - LEC005: MIPS Assembler
Assembly Language ---> (cs241.binasm) ---> machine language (binary)

- read input string
  - make sense out of it
- translate into binary
### Stages
- Analysis: Making sense of the input string
  - understanding the meaning/intent
- Synthesis: Output equivalent machine binary instruction

**Analysis:** multiple steps
1. Tokenize / Scanning / Lexical Analysis
    - Convert input string into a sequence of Tokens (Tokenization is already done for you for A3)
  ```
class Token {
	std::string Kind; // the type of token (ID/REG/COMMA)
	std::string lexeme; // the actual input characters making up this token
	public:
	---------------
	---------------
	---------------
}
``` 
Scanner produces a vector<vector< Token >>

2. Parse: Make sense of what each line means
	- Simple to do for MIPS assembly.
	- Do it in an ad hoc way
	  - Depending on the type of instruction, check syntax
	  ```
	  if ( token[0].getKind() == "ID" 
						  token[0].getLexeme() == "add") {
						  }
	  ```
	  **Possible errors: **
	  - Incorrect no. of registers
	  - Incorrect no. of commas
	  - Incorrect range for registers
	  - Unexpected ID/NUM

Instead of looking for errors, look for what is correct and everything else will be wrong. Much easier.

### Synthesis
1. Produce within the assembler the 32 bits representing the instruction
2. Output these bits.
	How to deal with labels?
	Use of a label in bne/beq has to be converted to an instruction offset
	**Algorithm:-**
	- initialize PC <--- 0
	- increment PC by 4 for each instruction of .word when a label is defined
	- store the "lexeme" of PC in a map std::map< std::string, int > when a label is used
	- If used in a beq/bne, use the formula 
	- .word < label >
		just output the address where label was defined
		The map is a Symbol table (label names ---> addresses)

### Possible Errors
- Cannot define labels more than once.
  - before inserting into sym. table check that a mapping does not already exist
- Using a label not in sym. tbl.
  - But, labels can be defined *after* they are used.
  - Solution: Write a multi-pass (2) assembler
    - **Pass 1:** 
      - tokenize
      - Parse - syntax checks where possible
      - Create Sym. Tbl.
    - **Pass 2:**
      - Check uses of labels
      - Generate output
        1. Produce the 32-bit representation internally
        2. Output the bits

### Manipulating Bits
**Left Bit Shift:**
```
x << n

0001 << 0    0001
0001 << 1    0010
0001 << 2    0100
0001 << 3    1000

```

**Right Bit Shift:**
```
x >> n       x/
0100 >> 0    n
0100 >> 1    0
0100 >> 2    1
0100 >> 3
1000 >> 1


```
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTYwNDY2NjA2NSwxNjE4MTM3NjgxLC02Nz
Y1MzA3ODcsNzg3NDc5NDg4LC02NTUzMTQ3NjAsMTIzNzI4NzA5
MywtMzgzMTAxNDMyLC01NDU4MDA4Nl19
-->